All right.
We are going to transition
to our second talk.
I just wanted to let you
know that Robert Jacobi is
with us hanging out in the
chat so please feel free
to pop in your questions.
I'm sure he would love
to interact with you all.
Our second talk is going
to be ARIA State Management
and Modern CSS presented by
Nick Croft, lead developer
of Reaktiv Studios.
Folks, this is
Nick Croft with Reaktiv Studios.
You may already know me as
Nick, the Geek.
Today I'm going this talk about ARIA
State Management and Modern CSS.
Before I get into that I want to
tell you a little bit about myself.
Visually, I'm a pretty large guy.
I’ve got shaggy hair
and shaggy beard.
I am wearing a blue shirt.
I may look kind of scary,
but I promise I'm really nice.
One thing about me is I just
recently got my first tattoo.
That is in honor of my daughter.
Last year she had a traumatic
heart attack, nearly died on us,
lost her left leg,
has a brain injury.
But she is doing phenomenally well.
She's been recovering.
Started back at school.
We’re real excited about that.
So, I got that on her alive day to
honor the fact that she survived.
I bring that up because a lot of
what I focus on is accessibility.
I have been focused on
that for a long time.
But now it's lit the
fire sort of speak
and I'm even more excited about it.
So, I want to dig in and
talk about what is going on
with ARIA State management.
I’ve created a demo here.
You should be able to see it.
I’ve got my accordion demo.
And this accordion demo will
use ARIA as we set state
and controls and styles states
in order to make them a priority
in the visual and screen
reader information.
If I scroll down here,
we’ll see this demo here.
We’ve got toggle panel one
with some Lorem ipsum there
and the first bit
of that is a link.
And then toggle panel two,
and toggle panel three.
Now if I click on one of
these, it's going to close.
And if I click on it
again, it's going to open.
And if I click on panel
two, it's going to open.
If I click on panel
three, it's going to open.
They will continue to toggle
and open as long as I continue
to click on them.
Now I can also use my keyboard.
So, I'm switching
to use the tab key.
I'm focused into panel one and
I'm going to hit the spacebar,
and it opens right up.
Now, If I tab again, it's going to
focus on that Lorem ipsum because-
it’ a focusable element.
I’m going to tab out and close.
If I tab again,
it's going to skip right over that.
That's really important that it
doesn't focus on focusable elements
when they’ve been hidden.
Now if I continue to tab around
and open things up, it works.
If I tab up to panel number
two, and this time I'm going
to hit my number key,
it’s going to work.
It's really important that happens
because buttons should work
with the spacebar and Enter key.
We’ll talk about that
more in a moment.
Last thing I want to
show you with this demo,
is if I turn on my screen
reader, it is going to work.
VoiceOver on
Safari, A11Y Day Demo,
Private Browsing
window, visited, link,
WordPress Accessibility Day 2022,
has keyboard focus [unintelligible]
accordion.
You are currently on
heading level two.
I am using my screen reader.
I’ve just used my mouse to move
it into this so I can focus
on the accordion demo.
First thing I’m going to do is
hit my tab key which is going
to move me down to the panels.
Toggle panel
one, collapsed button.
You are currently on
a heading level three.
And what it did was announced
that this is currently collapsed.
I'm going to use my
spacebar to open it.
Toggle panel
one, expanded button.
Now it's announced that
it’s expanded and I can go ahead
and move in and see
what's in that content.
One, link,
Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet,
consectetur adipscing elit sed
vitae, tringila nisl,
Mauris volutpat volutpat porta.
You are currently
on a text element.
Next.
Toggle panel number
two and again I can open this.
Toggle panel
two, expanded, button.
Toggle panel two, collapsed button.
Toggle panel three,
expanded button, main.
You are current.
Toggle panel three,
collapsed, button.
VoiceOver off.
All the states are announced
as we’re working with this.
It's real important those states
are announced so that people know
what is happening, what's going
to go on when they interact
with all these buttons.
Now let's look at some of the
code that makes this work.
Now you may be worried
because this says svelte here,
but I assure you that the reason
I picked this is so we can focus
on pure HTML.
In fact, there is only HTML happening
inside of this particular file.
And the other files we look
at is only Vanilla JavaScript,
and only simple CSS.
The first thing we have got is
a div and we have an id there.
I'm not really using this right now,
but I could use it if I needed it.
And it has a class accordion.
Most of the classes throughout
here are used for styling.
We do have a little bit of work
that I'm using in JavaScript
to pull in some of these classes,
but for the most part they are used
for styling.
Then we’ve got that h3,
and we’re using heading tag
so that these can be part of
headings as they appear by sections.
That is a little bit different than
we might have with different kind
of control like a tab where it's
not really separate sections
that are there.
This is going to be
labeled using headings.
And then we have a button.
Again, it's really important
that we use a button.
We will talk about this more
later, but we get some free stuff
because it's a button.
And the type is being declared.
That's not necessarily
specifically required.
I pulled this from the
WCAG, ARIA guidelines there.
They have these different
components and I modified it some,
but I lucked in a few
things that they have there.
The ARIA-expanded is what
indicates that the panel is open.
And then the class is what we’re
using to style it and target it.
Then we have ARIA
controls and panel one.
This is an id, and it targets
this id here, that is our panel.
We are going to link
these two ids together,
these two elements together
using this ARIA controls.
And then finally, we have an id
on here that we’re going to use,
as well to link these
two things together.
And now we have a span,
and we have a little bit of text
that’s being read out.
We’re using the span to handle
some of our styling with this.
Now, we’ve got the panel itself,
and so it has id is panel one.
The role is region because
we’ve got multiple regions.
We are labeling them.
And we label them using the
accordion one which is our button.
And it’s labeled by
this content here.
Next, we have a class.
The class is being used in
order to target the CSS.
Finally,
we have ARIA-hidden is false.
This particular element is shown
at page load, so it's not hidden.
And our button says
that it is expanded
because the thing that it
controls is not hidden.
It’s expanded.
Inside of it we just have
a little bit of HTML,
a couple of paragraph tags with
some Lorem ipsum and this link tag.
We can put any kind of HTML
inside there that is acceptable
to put inside of a div which is
pretty much any kind of HTML.
So, you can have
images, lists, headings.
You can have other divs, spans,
tables, forms, whatever you need
to put inside of there,
it can be added to it.
I basically,
replicated this two more times.
We have another h3 and button.
This is one is ARIA expand false.
And it is controlling
this section two here
which is ARIA-hidden
is true at page load.
And this third one,
rather, is very similar.
Just has another unique id
here and a unique id here.
We want to make sure these ids
are always unique, so they pull in
and work correctly
with our JavaScript.
Speaking of our JavaScript,
let's look at our JavaScript.
It’s all of 33 lines of
code including white space,
including all of the comments
that I’ve added to this
to make it understand what's
going on with everything.
The first thing that I do while I am
using a EventListener I downloaded
just to make sure that everything
exists before we start trying
to interact with it.
The next thing I do is
set my accordion triggers.
I am targeting that class.
That is the buttons.
Down at the bottom of there I’m
looping my accordion triggers
and I’m adding an
EventListerner on click.
Now this is why it’s so important
to use a button whenever you need
to have some kind of actionable
action, something that happens
whenever you click on it, instead
of going to a different webpage.
Because a button should
respond to a click.
It should respond to the Enter key.
It should respond to the spacebar.
If you used, let’s say, a link
and gave it role equals button
then it would by default work
with the Enter key and work
with a click, but it would
not work with the spacebar.
The screen reader,
they are hearing this is a button,
but they are not actually
be able to interact.
Then you have to add an
EventListener for a key to see
if they pressed the spacebar,
which adds a lot more complexity.
If you make it a button,
you get all of that for free.
Now this calls this button click
which basically calls
this toggle panel.
The main reason I separated that
out is I wanted to really be able
to focus on what is happening here.
We have the button that gets
passed to it and we load our panel.
We’re able to find our panel
because we’re using ARIA controls.
Remember that is an id and
it is the id of our panel.
We can just get this attribute
and use get element by id.
And now we’ve got a panel.
The next thing I want to do is
find out if it's currently visible.
And if it is visible,
then ARIA- expanded will be true.
That is the current
state of the button.
Now we need to change the
state of the button which is
what we’re going to do here.
On the button itself, we are
going to change the ARIA expanded
to the opposite of whatever
this visible property is.
If it is currently visible,
it will now be false,
ARIA-expanded equals false.
If it is not visible,
currently ARIA-expanded is false,
then it will flip that
ARIA-expanded is true.
And then our panel property is going
to set an Attribute on ARIA hidden.
If the button is currently
visible, ARIA-expanded is true.
That means ARIA-hidden is
currently false, and we need
to make ARIA-hidden true.
We’re going to flip that
now, so, it becomes true.
Or we are going to switch
it around to make it false.
That's all of the JavaScript.
And all we’re doing is
flipping those two attributes
and we’re using the ARIA controls
and ARIA-expanded to find out
what current states are.
We can do a lot of other
stuff for state management
if we wanted to but this was
really simple and easy to do.
Let the DOM be our
state management.
The last thing we
have is our styling.
Now with the styling, basically,
the top of this is focused largely
on creating the look
and feel of everything.
We’re adding borders.
We’re adding some different
spacing and padding, some colors,
all that stuff is happening.
Now one of the things
that we have down here is
on the accordion trigger
after, this code right here is
what is making our down arrow.
And we are setting a
transition of transform so that
whenever this value changes, the
transform is going to be animated.
And then again with our accordion
panel we have set our visibility,
and we have hidden our overflow and
we have our scale set as a default.
But the other thing that we’re doing
here is we have a transition all,
so we are going to be animating
a few different things
whenever that expands.
Now the last bit, the stuff that
actually does the triggering
is this little code right here.
On our accordion trigger,
whenever ARIA-expanded is true
that means that it’s open.
We change our transform, and what
that does is flips the icon around
so it’s pointing up.
And it's going to do a rotate
effect whenever that happens
because we have got that
transition on transform.
And then the accordion panel
itself, if it is ARIA-hidden true,
then we want to hide
the accordion panel.
By default, it shows and then
whenever the state changes,
we are going to hide it.
And visibility becomes hidden.
This is really important
because it’s what prevents focus
from happening to
content inside of there.
And then we change our scale,
and we change some padding,
and we change our height
and that's what allows it
to have that animated effect.
However, we don't want to leave
that as the only way we do things
because sometimes animations
can cause people trouble.
We have prefers-reduced-motion
happening.
And all I'm doing is taking
those two animated elements
and setting the transition to
none so it's going to just snap,
whenever people activate it.
And that way they won't have any
potentially triggering animations.
There’s a lot of different
ways to handle the animations.
If I were to take a
little bit more time,
I probably would get some keyframes
and get some roll-up effects
and some other really cool things
you can do using keyframes.
In that case we would want to
have a keyframe here that had
either reduced motion or no
motion associated with it.
That way we can honor that request
for preferred-reduced motion.
That's all the stuff that
is happening with this.
Everything is working really well.
As you see if I click on
this, that rotates around.
This animates down.
All things are happening
and working correctly.
One of the things that I did
is also have a tabs demo.
I don't have quite enough time
to go through all the code,
but it's really similar.
And you just click on it,
everything works correctly.
All the ARIA controls and all the
different ARIA describedby labels
all work correctly.
The fun thing about this one
is if you use your tab key,
you actually focus on the tab
group and then you're able
to use your keyboard left/right arrow
to navigate through all of this.
Otherwise,
it works pretty much the same.
Now to make this
easier for you to get
because I know there's a
little bit of code there,
I have got these CodePens set up.
And these links we’ll make
sure they are provided to you.
And I will be tweeting them out
as well if you want to follow me
as Nick_theGeek just like
it is here in this CodePen.
But if you go
to codepen.io/Nick_theGeek/pen/gOZqKWL
or YzLBvMN.
Those two pens right there are
going to get you all the code
that I just shared.
It is going to be set up as
pure HTML, JavaScript and CSS
so you can import that into whatever
kind of framework you're using
whether it’s PHP, whether it’s
React, whether it’s Vue,
whether it’s Svelte,
whether whatever.
You can get that into whatever
you’re using and start modifying this
to your own ends.
I hope this has been
helpful and informative.
Looking forward to a great conf.
You all have a wonderful day.